FELL DOWN A WELL HARDCORE LIST

ok, there was a post regarding hardcore and what hardcore records one needs probably a week ago that I just got finished replying to, so here it is. It is incredibly long winded.

at any rate, what hardcore records you should have depends entirely on what subgenres of hardcore you're into. despite its reputation, hardcore really is a pretty diverse and innovative genre. I’ll save you the trouble if you don’t want to read all of this, as I can’t imagine anyone would. If I had to pick 25 hardcore records to be stuck with forever, they’d be:

Anomie – Discography
Bread & Circuits – Bread & Circuits
City of Caterpillar – City of Caterpillar
Clikatat Ikatowi – Orchestrated and Conducted by Clikatat Ikatowi
Los Crudos – Asesinos: Discography
Current - Discography
Deathreat – The Severing of the Last Barred Window
Discharge – Hear Nothing, See Nothing, Say Nothing
Drive Like Jehu – Drive Like Jehu
Econochrist – Discography
From Ashes Rise – From Ashes Rise
Fugazi – Repeater
Fugazi – Red Medicine
Heroin - Destination
His Hero Is Gone – Monuments to Thieves
Husker Du – Everything Falls Apart and More
Minor Threat – Complete Discography
Mohinder – Everything
Necros – Conquest for Death
Negative Approach – Total Recall
One Eyed God Prophecy – One Eyed God Prophecy
Rites of Spring – End on End
Rudimentary Peni – Death Church
Torches to Rome – Torches to Rome
Union of Uranus – Discography (not actually out yet)


I’ll break them down a bit by subgenre

EARLY DC HARDCORE
depending on who you ask, hardcore either started in DC or LA. i greatly prefer the DC stuff, so i'll start there. the band that gives DC a claim on the birth of hardcore is Bad Brains. Bad Brains mixed reggae and punkrock in a way the British punks hadn't really thought of and ended up with a sound no one's really been able to duplicate since. Their live shows inspired the first generation of DC hardcore bands, who basically laid the groundwork for most of the important hardcore that followed. obviously, Minor Threat was a huge part of the scene, as were The Faith (Alec MacKaye, Ian's brother's band, also known as The Untouchables), Artificial Peace, Deadline, and Government Issue (there was also a slightly better than average band called State of Alert from this period that featured a scrawny kid named Henry Garfield who later changed his name and became Black Flag's fourth singer). Dischord Records early catalog is basically a historical document of all this stuff.

necessary records:
Bad Brains - Bad Brains cd (ROIR)
Bad Brains - Rock for Light cd (Caroline)
Bad Brains - I Against I cd (SST)
Minor Threat - Complete Discography cd (Dischord)
The Faith/Void - Faith/Void/Faith split cd (Dischord)
Artificial Peace/Marginal Man - Discography/Double Image split cd (Lost & Found, nearly impossible to find)
Deadline - 8/2/82 lp (Peterbilt, like 500 pressed, nearly impossible to find and fucking expensive)
Government Issue - Complete History, Vol. 1 cd (Dr. Strange)
various - Dischord 1981: The Year in Seven Inches cd (Dischord)
various - Flex Your Head cd (Dischord)

LA HARDCORE
i honestly don't care all that much about LA hardcore, so i'm not the best source on it. generally, the bands were not as fast as the bands from DC, but were considerably heavier. obviously, the most important band from this scene was Black Flag. their first singer, Keith Morris, left to start The Circle Jerks. over the course of the next few seven inch records, they had two more singers, Chavo Pederast and Dez Cadena, the second of whom moved to guitar when Henry Rollins joined the band. i think Rollins is basically a pinhead, but it's pretty hard to deny how important this band was. the only other hardcore band from this scene who are really worth your time in my estimation is The Minutemen, who sounded absolutely nothing like what you think of when you think LA hardcore.

necessary records:
Black Flag - The First Four Years cd (SST)
Black Flag - Damaged cd (SST)
The Minutemen - Double Nickels on the Dime cd (SST)
The Minutemen - Post-Mersh, Vol. 1 cd (SST)
The Minutemen - Post-Mersh, Vol. 2 cd (SST)
The Minutemen - Post-Mersh, Vol. 3 cd (SST)

EARLY MIDWEST HARDCORE
three bands from the midwest from the same time period as the aforementioned scenes stand out: Negative Approach, The Necros, and Husker Du. Detroit's Negative Approach sounded not too unlike Minor Threat, and they're really one of the most criminally underlooked bands in hardcore. eventually, they turned into The Laughing Hyenas, but you don't need to know about that. The Necros were a pretty incredible thrash band from Ohio who basically provided the blueprint for all the bands from the late 90s thrash revival. fans of Minneaspolis's Husker Du's later material would be surprised at just how fast their early stuff was by comparison. Chicago produced the amazing Naked Raygun and Effigies, but they're really more post-hardcore. you need their records anyway, so forget about categories.

necessary records:
Negative Approach - Total Recall cd (Touch & Go)
The Necros - Conquest for Death lp/cd (Touch & Go/bootleg, the lp is incredibly rare and goes for waaay too much money, the cd was a bootleg that included their eps and stuff. good luck finding either.)
Husker Du - Everything Falls Apart and More cd (Rhino)
Husker Du - Zen Arcade cd (SST)
Husker Du - Eight Miles High/Makes No Sense at All cdep (SST)
Husker Du - New Day Rising cd (SST)
Naked Raygun - Basement Screams cd (Quarterstick)
Naked Raygun - Throb Throb cd (Quarterstick)
Naked Raygun - All Rise cd (Quarterstick)
Naked Raygun - Jettison cd (Quarterstick)
The Effigies - Remains Nonviewable cd (Touch & Go)

BOSTON HARDCORE
nevermind

EARLY UK HARDCORE
the UK's best early 80s hardcore bands remain pretty unknown is the US, but they've had a ton of influence on the diversity and creativity of US hardcore. Rudimentary Peni made incredibly warped songs with strange time signatures, and devoted basically an entire album to HP Lovecraft. Discharge made the case that hardcore actually started in the UK with their blazing crushing amazing early records. Later, they turned into a shitty metal band, but not before influencing all kinds of anarchopunk and heavy hardcore bands. Amebix laid some of the groundwork for both the anarcho/crust scene and heavy bands like Neurosis.

necessary records:
Rudimentary Peni - The EPs of RP cd (Outer Himalayan)
Rudimentary Peni - Death Church cd (Outer Himalayan)
Rudimentary Peni - Cacophony cd (Outer Himalayan)
Discharge - Why cd (Sanctuary/Castle)
Discharge - Hear Nothing, See Nothing, Say Nothing cd (Sanctuary/Castle)
Discharge – Never Again cd (Sanctuary/Castle)
Discharge - Clay Punk Singles Collection cd (Clay)
Amebix - Arise! cd (Alternative Tentacles)

NEW YORK HARDCORE
what started with respectable bands like Agnostic Front and Sick of it All eventually degenerated into ridiculous toughguy bullshit. by the late 80s, the entire New York scene was dominated by straight-edge propaganda and meathead violence. the only bands in whom i find anything worthwhile from the later NYHC stuff are Gorilla Biscuits and Youth of Today, who then intermingled to form the considerably more creative Quicksand (as well as the totally awful Civ). There was also a New Jersey band around the same time named Turning Point who incorporated this sound into a more positive energetic result.

necessary records:
Gorilla Biscuits - Gorilla Biscuits cdep (Revelation)
Gorilla Biscuits - Start Today cd (Revelation)
Youth of Today - Break Down the Walls cd (Revelation)
Quicksand - Slip cd (Polygram)
Quicksand - Manic Compression cd (Island)
Turning Point – 1988-1991 cd (Jade Tree)

REVOLUTION SUMMER
ok, back to DC. in 1984, Guy Picciotto started the incredible Rites of Spring. this was the beginning of the REAL emo scene, and what became known as the DC sound. forget all that dashboard confessional bullshit. the real stuff was creative hardcore played at more of a rock tempo. i cannot stress enough what a complete travesty it is that the crap people associate with the term emo today has tarnished what was an amazing period of music. When Rites of Spring, Minor Threat, Deadline, and The Faith broke up, they fractioned into Ian MacKaye's Embrace, Alec MacKaye's Ignition, Guy Picciotto's One Last Wish, and Brian Baker's Dag Nasty. Through a couple more transitional bands, Embrace and One Last Wish eventually became Fugazi, who everyone should already know about. When Ignition broke up, Alec MacKaye started The Warmers and Chris Thompson fronted first Circus Lupus, then The Monorchid, then Skull Kontrol, and now has another band who's name escapes me. Dag Nasty's first singer, Sean Brown, started Swiz with people who would later be in Shudder to Think and Bluetip. Swiz had a very distinct delivery that was subsequently copied a bit by the now infamous Ink & Dagger. Dag Nasty's second singer, Dave Smalley, left to form All, and then left All to form Down by Law. Brian Baker ended up in Bad Religion. Later bands in this scene include the ex-Government Issue Jawbox, the pre-June of '44 (and hundreds of others) Hoover, Kerosene 454, and The Nation of Ulysses, who will bring us to our next chapter.

necessary records:
Rites of Spring - End on End cd (Dischord)
One Last Wish - 1986 cd (Dischord/Peterbilt)
Ignition - Complete Services cd (Dischord)
Dag Nasty - Can I Say cd (Dischord)
Fugazi - 13 Songs cd (Dischord)
Fugazi - Repeater + 3 Songs cd (Dischord)
Fugazi - Steady Diet of Nothing cd (Dischord)
Fugazi - In on the Kill Taker cd (Dischord)
Fugazi - Red Medicine cd (Dischord)
Fugazi - End Hits cd (Dischord)
Fugazi - The Argument cd (Dischord)
Swiz - No Punches Pulled cd (Jade Tree)
Hoover - The Lurid Traversal of Route 7 cd (Dischord)
Hoover - Hoover cd (Slowdime/Dischord)
The Nation of Ulysses - 13 Point Program to Destroy America cd (Dischord)
The Nation of Ulysses - Plays Pretty for Baby cd (Dischord)

SAN DIEGO HARDCORE
When The Nation of Ulysses quirky, spazzy energy made it to the west coast, John Reis (also of Rocket from the Crypt) and Drive Like Jehu took that energy and combined it with chaotic intensity, and San Diego hardcore (aka San Diego emo) was born. Comprising some of the most abrasive and innovative bands in hardcore, this subgenre is most definitely not for everyone, but it's my favorite. After Drive Like Jehu hit like a ton of bricks, the amazing band Heroin emerged. Heroin's drummer, Aaron Montaigne then fronted the insane Antioch Arrow (copied shamelessly by The Blood Brothers), who basically put forth a pure wall of noise. Second Story Window, Candle, Spanakorzo, and my personal favorites Clikatat Ikatowi followed, each producing more wonderfully strange music. members of Spanakorzo, Unbroken, and Struggle formed the one of a kind Swing Kids, who subsequently became Bread & Circuits, The Crimson Curse, and the notorious Locust. Two non-San Diego bands who were closely associated with this scene were nothern California's Mohinder and Colorado's Angel Hair, who's family trees led to Her Space Holiday and Pleasure Forever respectively.

necessary records:
Drive Like Jehu - Drive Like Jehu cd (Headhunter)
Drive Like Jehu - Yank Crime cd (Interscope)
Heroin - Destination cd (Gravity)
Antioch Arrow - In Love with Jetts/The Lady Is a Cat cd (Gravity)
Second Story Window - Second Story Window (2) lp (Gravity)
Clikatat Ikatowi - Orchestrated & Conducted by Clikatat Ikatowi cd (Gravity)
Swing Kids - Discography cd (Three.One.G)
The Crimson Curse - Both Feet in the Grave lp (Goldenrod)
Mohinder - Everything cd (Gold Standard Laboratories)
Angel Hair - Pregnant with the Senior Class cd (Gravity)
Guyver.One - Obsessed With... lp (Inchworm)

LATE 80S/EARLY 90S EMO
From Rites of Spring to The Hated and Moss Icon in 1986, and up until Sunny Day Real Estate’s LP2 in 1995, emo remained a subset of hardcore. It didn’t necessarily always have the same speed or crushing heaviness as is commonly associated with hardcore, but it still most definitely hardcore. Many many great bands continued to put out kick ass hardcore records in this vein, often with more contemplative lyrics, until Sunny Day Real Estate indierockified it and proved you could sell it. Half of SDRE became Foo Fighters, and then term “emo” was eventually bastardized into the shit you see on MTV today. Please don’t hold those transgressions against the following amazing records.

necessary records:
Honeywell - Industry lp (Autometric)
Portraits of Past - 01001011101 lp (Ebullition)
Sleepytime Trio – Memory-Minus cd (Lovitt)
Current - Discography cd (Council)
Indian Summer - Discography cd (Future)
Moss Icon - Lyburnum cd (Vermiform)
Fuel - Monuments to Excess cd (Broken Rekids)
Iconoclast - Iconoclast cd (Ebullition)
Universal Order of Armageddon - Discography cd (Kill Rock Stars)
Shotmaker - The Complete Discography 1993-1996 cd (Troubleman Unlimited)
Native Nod - Today Puberty, Tomorrow the World cd (Gern Blandsten)
Jawbreaker – Bivouac cd (Tupelo/Communion)
Still Life - Slow Children and Beyond cd (The Sunflower Tribe)
Still Life – From Angry Heads with Skyward Eyes cd (Ebullition)
Still Life - Madness and the Gackle cd (The Sunflower Tribe)
Policy of Three – Dead Dog Summer lp (Old Glory)
Julia – Julia cd (Bloodlink)
Frail – Make Your Own Noise cd (Bloodlink)
Spirit Assembly – Welcome to Lancaster County lp (Yuletide)
Impetus Inter - An Infinite Capacity for Romance cd (Cerebellum)

FRENCH HARDCORE/SCREAMO
In the early 90s, several French bands began to mimic the hardcore emo bands who incorporated the most screaming, and built it into a subgenre all their own. Bands like Undone, Fingerprint, Jasemine, Ivich, Alcatraz, Elements of Need, and my favorite, Anomie perfected this, but it’s all but extinct now. There’s still a great band named Amanda Woodward making the French proud, but there’s not too much after them.

necessary records:
Anomie - Discography cd (Spurt/Boisleve)
Fingerprint – Anthology cd (Stonehenge)
Alcatraz - Ni Dieu ni Maitre, a Bas la Calotte et Vive la Sociale! cd (Stonehenge)
Undone – Discography cd (Stonehenge, out later this year)
Peu Etre/Carther Matha/Rachel - Split split cd (Le Brun, le Roux)
Amanda Woodward – Demo Repress 10” (Stonehenge)
Amanda Woodward – Ultramort. cd (Destructure)

ANARCHO/CRUST
Most of the modern crust bands have learned from Crass, Amebix, and Discharge, and all in all, most of them sound pretty similar (very political and very abraisive). Econochrist fused the typical crust sound with more straight-forward hardcore to impressive result. More recently, Anti-Product picked up kind of where they left off. They were definitely the best from the last 5 or 6 years. Aus-Rotten are probably the most well known of the recent bunch, and their hearts were in the right place, but unfortunately their lyrics often left something to be desired. Detestation kicked ass musically, but their vocals were incredibly monotonous, as are a lot of crust bands’.

necessary records:
Econochrist – Discography double cd (Ebullition)
Anti-Product – The Deafening Silence of Grinding Gears lp (Tribal War)
Anti-Product – The Eps of AP cd (Tribal War)
Aus-Rotten – Not One Single Fucking Hit! cd (Tribal War)
Detestation – Detestation cd (Profane Existence/Skuld)
Dirt - Black and White double cd (Active/Skuld)

THE REST OF THE 90S/00S
Easily the most important hardcore band to come out of Chicago has been Los Crudos. Amazing lyrics (all in Spanish, but with English translations in the liner notes) and fast moshable songs have made them favorites worldwide. There was a thrash revival in the late 90s spurred by ex-Crudos bands Charles Bronson and MK-Ultra. Born Against is the other really important band to come about during the 90s, but they are incredibly abraisive, and the whole point was sort of to be not very good. They’re a band you need to hear, but not one I’d recommend buying anything by unless you’re really into hardcore (their records do kind of rule, but are not for the average listener). There was a re-emergence of heavy hardcore from Canadian bands like Chokehold, Union of Uranus, One Eyed God Prophecy, and the Canadian label Great American Steak Religion. Yannick from GASR moved to Memphis and started the incredible His Hero Is Gone, which splintered into Deathreat, From Ashes Rise, Tragedy, No Parade, and Severed Head of State. Unbroken were a pretty great metallic hardcore band worth mentioning. Several great bands featuring Mike Kirsch, including Torches to Rome, Bread & Circuits, John Henry West, and Please Inform the Captain This Is a Hijack, have produced straight-forward hardcore that skews toward the DC sound. Downcast and Groundwork also made some solid straight-forward stuff. Ink & Dagger sounded like Swiz, while pretending to be vampires. Bands like Makara, Reversal of Man, and Orchid continued the blistering screamy sound, with a good touch of One Eyed God Prophecy thrown in. Eventually, bands started to incorporate a lot of these sounds together, producing creative intricate hardcore with a definite old-school emo influence. Funeral Diner, The State Secedes, Off Minor, Yage, This Machine Kills, Yaphet Kotto, Fields Lay Fallow, JR Ewing, and Encyclopedia of American Traitors have all shown what still can be done with hardcore, but without doubt, the band possessing the most potential from this group is City of Caterpillar. They really are something special.

necessary records:

Los Crudos – Asesinos: Discography cd (Lengua Armada)
Born Against – The Rebel Sound of Shit and Failure cd (Vermiform/Kill Rock Stars)
Hail Mary - All Aboard the Sinking Ship cd (Vermiform)
Rorschach - Autopsy cd (Gern Blandsten)
Charles Bronson – Complete Discocrappy double cd (Youth Attack)
In/humanity - Violent Resignation: The Great American Teenage Suicide Rebellion cd (Prank)
Unbroken - Life.Love.Regret. cd (New Age)
Age - Age lp (Love)
Assay - Pisschrist lp (Love)
Chokehold – Content with Dying lp (The Great American Steak Religion)
Union of Uranus – Disaster by Design lp (The Great American Steak Religion)
Union of Uranus – Discography cd (Stonehenge/Feral Ward, out later this year)
One Eyed God Prophecy – One Eyed God Prophecy lp (The Great American Steak Religion)
His Hero Is Gone – 15 Counts of Arson cd (Prank)
His Hero Is Gone – Monuments to Thieves cd (Prank)
His Hero Is Gone – The Plot Sickens: Enslavement Redefined cd (The Great American Steak Religion)
Deathreat – The Severing of the Last Barred Window cd (Partners in Crime)
Deathreat – Consider It War lp (Partners in Crime)
From Ashes Rise – From Ashes Rise cd (The Great American Steak Religion)
Tragedy – Tragedy cd (Tragedy)
Tragedy – Vengeance cd (Tragedy)
Severed Head of State – 1998 to 2001 cd (Ebullition)
Torches to Rome - Torches to Rome lp (Ebullition)
Bread & Circuits - Bread & Circuits cd (Ebullition)
Bread & Circuits/Former Members of Alfonsin – The Future is Unwritten. split lp (El Grito)
Former Members of Alfonsin/Project Hate – Split split lp (Phyte)
Please Inform the Captain This Is a Hijack – Please Inform the Captain This Is a Hijack lp (Empire)
Kill the Man Who Questions – The Sugar Industry cd (Coalition)
Born Dead Icons - Work cd (Feral Ward)
Born Dead Icons - Salvation on the Knees cd (Partners in Crime)
Born Dead Icons - Ruins cd (Feral Ward)
Area 51 - Discography 10" (Hopscotch)
The Party of Helicopters - Abracadaver cd (Stickfigure)
Harriet the Spy - Anthology cd (Passacaglia)
Harriet the Spy - Unfuckwithable cd (Troubleman Unlimited)
Four Hundred Years - Suture and Other Songs cd (Lovitt)
Four Hundred Years - Transmit Failure cd (Lovitt)
.Nema - Bring Our Curses Home cd (Sound Pollution)
Twelve Hour Turn - The Victory of Flight cd (No Idea)
Johnny Angel - Fucked Up...But Cool Fucked Up cd (Bloodlink)
Closure - Closure cd (Mountain)
Volume Eleven - Prole Art Threat lp (Hand.Held.Heart)
Volume Eleven - Kotadelic Cytex and Stardust Escapes lp (Hand.Held.Heart)
Yaphet Kotto – The Killer Was in the Government Blankets cd (Ebullition)
Yaphet Kotto – Syncopated Synthetic Laments for Love cd (Ebullition)
Burning Defeat - Seldom cd (Green)
Downcast – Downcast lp (Ebullition)
Groundwork – Today We Will Not Be Invisible nor Silent cd (Bloodlink)
Ink & Dagger – Drive This Seven Inch Wooden Stake through My Philadelphia Heart cd (Initial)
Brass Knuckles for Tough Guys - Noise Man Kills Him cd (Divot)
Anasarca - Discography cd (Second Nature)
Makara – Discography cd (Carmen Diablo)
Portrait - Portrait cd (Portrait)
Reversal of Man – Discography cd (Schematics, early stuff only)
Reversal of Man – Revolution Summer cd (Independence Day)
Reversal of Man – This Is Medicine cd (Ebullition)
Early Grace - And All I Run Into Are the Walls You Have Built cd (Independence Day)
The End of the Century Party - Isn't It Perfectly Fucking Delightful to Be So Goddamn Certain lp (Belladonna)
I Hate Myself - 10 Songs cd (No Idea)
Jenny Piccolo - Information Battle to Denounce the Genocide lp (Three.One.G)
Orchid – Dance Tonight! Revolution Tomorrow!/Chaos Is Me cd (Ebullition)
Orchid – Gatefold cd (Ebullition)
Profax - Discographie cd (Prawda)
Funeral Diner – Difference of Potential cd (Ape Must Not Kill Ape)
The State Secedes – The State Secedes cd (Level Plane)
Bright Calm Blue - Asymmetry Set cd (Divot)
Off Minor – Problematic Courtship cd (Golden Brown)
Off Minor – The Heat Death of the Universe cd (Clean Plate)
Yage – 3-17 October 1984 cd (Nova)
Yage – The Human Head Too Strong for Itself cd (Pure Pain Sugar)
This Machine Kills – Death in the Audobon Ballroom cd (Ebullition)
Fields Lay Fallow – One Hundred Years of High Rises… lp (Lunchbox)
Wolves - Art.Culture.Work cd (Coalition)
The Red Scare - Capillary Lockdown cd (Troubleman Unlimited)
The Red Scare - Strangers Die Every Day cd (Troubleman Unlimited)
JR Ewing – Calling in Dead cd (Coalition)
JR Ewing – Ride Paranoia cd (Gold Standard Laboratories)
Encyclopedia of American Traitors – Discography cd (Shove)
City of Caterpillar – City of Caterpillar cd (Level Plane)
City of Caterpillar – Demo & Live Recording cd (Level Plane))